# Can A.I. Help Revitalize Indigenous Languages?

<p>Indigenous researchers and roboticists are crafting innovative tools to help save endangered dialects.</p>

<p>The robot is shaped like a soup can with a little domed head, animal ears and a charming, rounded body. Like a parrot in pirate lore, the robot is intended to perch on a wearer’s shoulder, listening and even joining in on the conversation. Unlike most parrots, it can speak fluent Anishinaabemowin, an Indigenous language spoken by the Anishinaabe nation of North America. The bot , which uses an internally developed artificial intelligence model to learn and reproduce languages, is a new foray into wearable tech for language preservation.</p>

<p>Danielle Boyer , a 24-year-old Anishinaabe roboticist, designed the - Skobot to converse in endangered Indigenous languages, thereby helping to keep them alive. Made of brightly colored plastic, the bots are customizable and often adorned with accessories from pink tutus to top hats. Growing up below the poverty line in Michigan, Boyer was inspired to make technical education more accessible to Indigenous youth like herself. Her charity——helps distribute the Skobots and teach students about robotics and innovation. Her creation joins a new and burgeoning group of initiatives that utilize A.I. language tools to preserve dying or endangered languages, with some arguing that such technology shows promise for endangered Indigenous languages in particular.</p>

<p>Around 40 percent of the world’s roughly 6,700 languages are at risk of extinction , and many of them are spoken by Indigenous people . Researchers have shown that keeping these languages alive has positive effects beyond just cultural preservation. One study suggested that a connection with linguistic heritage can correspond to lower teen suicide rates . And contact with an ancestral language has also been positively correlated with physical health benefits, like lower rates of diabetes or excessive alcohol consumption .</p>

<p>New A.I. technologies are changing the language-learning game as educational tools, and According to Boyer, Skobot is the one of the first toys that speaks an Indigenous language. Inspired by talking Elmo toys, Boyer’s bot is motion-activated and uses real children’s voices to answer questions in the target language. To use it, a child or teen needs only ask the Skobot how to say a particular word or phrase. The A.I. model inside the toy then interprets the audio input and selects the appropriate pre-recorded audio file, simulating a conversation.</p>

<p>Like the Skobot, most new A.I. technologies developed by Native scientists are designed for a specific language community. Jacqueline Brixey, a computer scientist formerly at the University of Southern California and now joining the University of Wisconsin, created a chatbot called “Masheli” that can communicate in Choctaw. Drawing from a collection of animal stories, the chatbot can listen and respond to users in both English and the target language, helping conversational skills.</p>
